The Story So Far

You are Splorf, Space Corp Sanitation Engineer 5th Class, Lavatorial Division. A small yet vital cog in the corporate machine. You are good at your job. Another 20 years, and you could possibly make 4th Class Engineer. But today your mind is on other things than your job.

The rumours have reached even the lowest levels of Methane Station; the harvest ships have returned from their latest run to the Doom system with more than just gas - they brought disastrous news concerning the defensive system protecting Space Corp's interests from space pirates and fierce competitors!

"You there", a middle manager shouts at you, "Commander Splix needs a volunteer! Get your lazy plarp up to level 17 immediately!"

As you step into the turbolift, you nervously repeat the creed to yourself: "This is my spanner. There are many like it, but this one is mine..."


Controls

The game can be played using the keyboard or a joystick in port 2.

Pressing space or fire during the intro will skip to the title screen.

Pressing space or fire on the title screen will start the game.

Pressing space or fire in-game will make Splorf move upwards, away from the planet surface.

Releasing the space bar or fire button will make Splorf drop towards the planet.


High Score Table

If you get a high score, you can enter your name in the high score table using the keyboard or the joystick. The next time you get a high score, you can press fire or F7 to automatically fill in the previous name you entered.

The "Today's Top 10" table is reset every time you load and run the game. However, if you have a disk drive attached to your C64 the "All Time Top 10" table is loaded when you start the game, and if your score is high enough, it will be saved to disk.

If you are using the game in an emulator such as VICE, make sure to enable true drive emulation in the Options menu before you run the game.


Sound Options

Press F1 to select music 1-8 or silence
Press F3 to turn sound effects on/off

These keys work both in-game and on the title screen. You can also use a joystick to select music/SFX while on the title screen.

If a second SID chip is installed at $d420-$d4e0, it will be autodetected when the game starts, enabling the option to play sound effects and music simultaneously.



Credits

Copyright (C) 2016 Pond & SDW Developments

http://pondsoft.uk
http://sdwdevelopments.com


Programming by Andreas Gustafsson.
Graphics, music and manual by Vanja Utne.
Disk routines by Per Olofsson.

Beta testers:
Martin Gustafsson
Roy Fielding
Robin Harbron
James Monkman


Distributed with the Commodore 64 Ultimate with permission from Vanja Utne.