SCOTT ADAMS

Presents 

THE ADVENTURE SERIES 

Published by ADVENTURE INTERNATIONAL 

A Division of Scott Adams, Inc. 

ADVENTURE INTERNATIONAL U.K. 119 John Bright Street, Birmingham B1 1BE Copyright Adventure International 

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED LOADING INSTRUCTIONS B.B.C. 



To load a Scott Adams Adventure for the BBC computer, ensure that your cassette recorder is correctly connected, insert the cassette, ensuring it is fully rewound and switch on your computer. Ensure that your machine is in the correct loading mode by typing *TAPE then press RETURN and, if you have a filing system other than Tape installed, type PAGE=&EOO then press RETURN (if you are uncertain as to whether this applies then do it anyway). Type CHAIN" " then RETURN followed by PLAY on the cassette recorder at which point the screen will display Searching then when the program is found, Loading. Shortly after a title page will appear whilst the main program is loaded. When the load is complete a message will appear asking if you wish to start a new game or load a saved game. 

To commence play simply answer the prompt for a new game and you will be at the start of one of the most fascinating computer experiences available. If you wish to continue a Saved game, respond appropriately to the prompt and insert the cassette of your saved game (fully rewound) into your cassette recorder, press PLAY and then press RETURN as instructed on the screen. If you wish to save a game to continue at a later time, simply insert a blank tape into your cassette recorder then press PLAY & RECORD. Type SAVE GAME and press RETURN and follow the instructions on the screen which will prompt you to ready your cassette and press RETURN--Do so and your current position will be saved. Please note that, as per the instructions above, it is essential to load the program first before loading a Saved game. 

When loading a Scott Adams Adventure for a Commodore 64 computer, ensure that your cassette recorder is correctly connected and insert the cassette, making sure it is fully rewound and that your computer is switched on. Press SHIFT-RUN, RETURN and then PLAY on your cassette recorder as instructed on the screen which should then display SEARCHING. When the program is found the display will change to LOADING and when completed the program will run with an initial message asking if you wish to start a new game or continue a saved game. To commence play simply answer the prompt for a new game. 

If you wish to continue a Saved game, respond appropriately, remove the Game cassette from the recorder, replacing it with the cassette of your Saved game (fully rewound) and follow the instructions on the screen to press PLAY on the recorder and then return. If you have any problems loading, check that your recorder is correctly connected, rewind the tape completely and try again. If you wish to continue a game at a later time, insert a blank tape into your cassette recorder then press PLAY & RECORD. Type SAVE GAME and press RETURN then follow the screen prompts which tell you to ready your cassette and press RETURN--Do so and your current position will be saved. Please note that, as per the instructions above, it is essential to load the program before attempting to load a Saved game. 

Playing Hints: Draw a map as you go, there are a lot more places than you think and without a map you will end up going round in circles or missing areas which you haven't tried. It doesn't need to be perfect as long as you have some record of where you have been and what you've found (as well as where you found it). Examine things you find and try to remember that most problems have solutions that require no more than some careful thought and a little common sense. If you get stuck try typing HELP--you may or may not get assistance but you Won't know until you ask and be careful about assuming things, it can be fatal. To speed things up you may use the following abbreviations: N, S, E, W, U, D, for Go North, South, East, West, Up or Down. I is short for Inventory and will list what you're carrying. Some (but not all) of the words available that you may find useful are:-- Get, Take, Drop, Go, Climb, Jump, Enter, Examine, Go, Leave, Move, Quit, Say, Wear, Read, Save, Light, Pull, Push and Look . . . There are others!!! 

Instructions are entered by you in the form of two word commands with the first word being a verb. If the computer doesn't understand, it will tell you so and you must try rewording what you wish to do e.g. instead of GO FLYING try FLY. You will find that objects which can be picked up usually require only the last part of their name as in the Blue Ox where typing GET OX is all that is needed. Good luck, happy adventuring and try not to die too often. THE ADVENTURES # 1 ADVENTURELAND--Wander through an enchanted realm and try to uncover the 13 lost treasures. There are wild animals and magical beings to reckon with as well as many other perils and mysteries. This is the Adams Classic that started it all! 

Difficulty Level: Moderate #2 PIRATE ADVENTURE

Only by exploring this strange island will you be able to uncover the clues necessary to lead you to your elusive goal--recovering the lost treasures of Long John Silver. 


Difficulty Level: Beginner #3 SECRET MISSION

In this exciting Adventure, time is of the essence as you race the clock to complete your mission in time--or else the world's first automated nuclear reactor is doomed! If you survive this challenging mission, consider yourself a true Adventurer! 


Difficulty Level: Advanced #4 VOODOO CASTLE

The Count has fallen victim to a fiendish curse placed on him by his enemies. There he lies, with you his only possible hope. Will you pull off a rescue, or is he really down for the Count?! 


Difficulty Level: Moderate #5 THE COUNT

It begins when you awake in a large brass bed in a castle somewhere in Transylvania. Who are you, what are you doing here and WHY did the postman deliver a bottle of blood? 


Difficulty Level: Moderate #6 STRANGE ODYSSEY

At the galaxy's rim, there are rewards aplenty to be harvested from a long-dead alien civilization, including fabulous treasures and advanced technologies far beyond human ken! Prepare yourself for the incredible! 


Difficulty Level: Moderate #7 THE MYSTERY FUN HOUSE

As Adventure #7 begins, you find yourself hopelessly lost in the middle of a carnival fun house. While escape may elude you, one thing is very clear--you're NOT here to have a good time! 


Difficulty Level: Moderate #8 PYRAMID OF DOOM 

This is an Adventure that will transport you to a dangerous land of crumbling ruins and trackless desert wastes into the PYRAMID OF DOOM! Jewels, gold--it's all here for the plundering--IF you can find the way. 


Difficulty Level: Moderate #9 GHOST TOWN

You must explore a once-thriving mining town in search of the 13 hidden treasures. With everything from rattlesnakes to runaway horses, it sure ain't going to be easy! Includes a special bonus scoring system too! 


Difficulty Level: Advanced # 10 SAVAGE ISLAND PART I

A small island holds an awesome secret--will you be able to discover it? This is the beginning of a two-part Adventure. (The story continues in SAVAGE ISLAND PART 2, ADVENTURE #11). NOTE: This one's a toughie--for experienced Adventurers only! 


Difficulty Level: Advanced #11 SAVAGE ISLAND PART II

The suspense begun in Adventure # 10 now comes to an incredible conclusion with SAVAGE ISLAND PART II! This Adventure requires you to have successfully finished #10, wherein you were given the secret password to begin this final half. NOTE: For experienced Adventurers only!


Difficulty Level: Advanced #12 GOLDEN VOYAGE

The king lies near death in the royal palace. You have only three days to bring back the elixir needed to rejuvenate him. Journey through the lands of magic fountains, sacred temples, stormy seas and gold, gold, GOLD! This one is for experienced Adventurers only! Difficulty Level: Advanced #13 SORCERER OF CLAY-MORGUE CASTLE--Solon the Master Wizard has learnt of Vileroth's destruction and how, in his final days, he concealed the stolen 13 Stars of Power within the Castle of Claymorgue, determined that no one should possess them. As Solon's apprentice with a few spells, can you recover Solon's stolen Stars. The Castle contains further spells but beware -- as an apprentice you may find the results unpredictable! Difficulty Level: Advanced. 


When You Sit Down To a Scott Adams' Adventure... Anything Can Happen!

Check out the other adventures at https://www.msadams.com

Distributed with the Commodore 64 Ultimate with permission from Brendan Curran.